# PROJECT
R-Shiny app  that incorporates QSAR approaches coupled with machine learning techniques to build models which can predict chemical activity and to determine which particular features of a compound are predictive of activity.

High-throughput experiments aims to identify the actives among a large number of
chemical compounds. QSAR models, are considered as an alternative to this large
scale virtual-screening of biologically active compounds since it promises a faster
and cheaper computational approach. The models are built with the assumption
that the structure of the compounds has features attributing towards it’s biological
activity, physical and chemical models. Since the QSAR models saves substantial
amount of time and resources, it is widely adopted in the drug discovery pipeline.
The models can assist in the design of new compounds with improved potency.
Replacement of animal testing for the ecological chemical risk assessment is one
of the greatest application of QSAR. For developing the QSAR models, the main
challenges faced include the huge heterogeneity in the assay data, disproportion in
the active-inactive compounds ratio and false positive rates. This web application
has been developed to implement the state-of-the art machine learning algorithms
to evaluate the predictive accuracy of the models and thus enable efficient anal-
ysis of experiments from bioassays. The application has a simple interface that
provides the user input options such the percentage of the data that goes into the
training set. The application also offers the flexibility to the user in choosing the
input format of the compounds in the dataset and these include - InChI, CAS-IDs,
PubChem SID, InChIKey and PubChem CID. Robust model predictions are gen-
erated without compromising on the simplicity of the interface.The application
has got integration with databases such as PubChem and with softwares such as
OpenBabel. Flexibility, simplicity and accuracy in prediction are the three main
objectives kept in mind while developing this application. The tools allows the
user to provide the data set of interest with the appropriate input format and the
system will automatically retrieve all the relevant information. The model build-
ing can take several minutes to hours depending on the size of the input dataset.
The application generates several statistical measures in the form of confusion
matrix and ROC curves that the user can analyze for knowing the accuracy of the models generated by each machine learning technique. Thus, through the per-
formance statistics, the user can select the best performing model. The chemical
compounds can be defined by a vast number of features. For the recognition of
the compound activities, not all the features would be relevant. Thus, there arises
a need for the removal to less relevant features in order to build a robust model.
The feature selection method implemented by the application provides the user
with the features (Descriptors) that are the most predictive of the activity status.
These optimal set of features can reduce the model training time and also enable
better transparency in the models. The selected descriptors can then be linked to
the biological activity through the implementation of a mathematical model.
The prediction accuracy of the classifiers used were analyzed through the confusion
matrix and the ROC curve.
